Dear Editor,

Thank you for your considerating email. We were of course disappointed by the decision, and a bit surprised by the reason stated. We thus allow ourselves for responding to the concern of the associated editor before submitting it to another journal. Maybe after our quick argumentation, you will accept to receive our manuscript as a new submission.

Our paper presents a new model to estimate optimum shifts in multi-species response curves. The principal novelty is the mathematical formulation of the species response curves that allow explicit estimates of optimum shifts. We present this new formulation in a Bayesian hierarchical linear model that estimates occupancy probabilities along an environmental gradient during two surveys. However, the new formulation could be incorporated in any hierarchical linear model, and thus in multi-species occupancy models. We mentioned some of the potential extensions in the last paragraph of the discussion but omitted to talk about potential incorporation in multi-species occupancy models. We address this point, and add a few lines about it at the end of the manuscript:

"Finally, we present the EHMOS within a hierarchical model that did not incorporate observation process. It is well known that imperfect detection could bias occupancy estimates, and should be addressed in modelling whenever it is possible. While our example does not allow the use of multi-species occupancy models, hierarchical linear models estimating both species occupancy and detection (Dorazio & Royle, 2005), due to the absence of sampling replication in historical data, it is straightforward to extend our framework in a MSOM by adding the observation process in the hierarchy of the model."

We agree that, when studying species distribution, ecologists should address the issue of observation error, i.e. imperfect detection, whenever possible. For instance, we have already published a paper that promotes the use of MSOM in insect studies (Mourguiart et al., 2020). However, due to data requirements is sometimes infeasible to deal with imperfect detection. It is still recurrent to have sampling design without replication in modern sampling, mainly due to budget limitation, and it was even more recurrent in historical sampling when imperfect detection effects were unknown. Hence, many research studying past shifts are and will be constrained to use models that do not address the issue of imperfect detection. We are thus confident that the model presented in the paper could be applied by many ecologists, even in this simple form. Besides, we are sure that those who used MSOM will have no difficulty applying our formulation in their models. Developing a MSOM requires a certain amount of knowledge in statistics, and modellers with that knowledge will see that is straightforward to extend our model (and code) in a MSOM.

We hope that we have convinced you that the relative simplicity of the model presented will not prevent the use of our formulation in other types of hierarchical linear models, such as MSOMs, and even could increase its dissemination.

On the behalf of all co-authors,
Yours faithfully,

Bastien Mourguiart


The goal of our paper is to present a new method that explicitely estimate optimum shifts between unimodal species response curves. We chose to present it in a relatively simple case in which multi-species shifts of occupancy optimums were estimated between two surveys using presence/absence data. As pointed by the associate editor, the model presented do not distinguish the observation process (i.e. detection) from the ecological process (i.e. occupancy). However, it is straighforward to add the observation process within our framework if detection/non-detection data are available, i.e. replicated sampling at the site-level, which was not our case. In fact, the new formulation allowing explicit estimate of shifts could be incorporated in any hierarchical linear models, and thus in multi-species occupancy model. This is its extensibility that is the main advantage of the formulation. 



 As our study was motivated by the case of studied presented, we stick to this particular example. We therefore develop a model that estimate optimum shifts in occupancy between two surveys in which presence/absence where collected. However, as it could be used with abundance data, or to compared more than two surveys, it could also be used for detection/non-detection obtain through replicated sampling. 

	- Our goal in the article : a new model formulation to detect optimum shifts in unimodal species response curves that suits for many topics and coule be integrated in any hierarchical model.
	- Straightforward to integrate EHMOS in a MSOM as modelers just have to replace usual quadratic formulation of the occupancy model by the EHMOS, and letting any detection model.
	- We acknowledge that MSOM should be used whenever its possible.
	- Discussion paragraph 


We chose to present EHMOS in a relatively simple case that match with our study case that lead the study. But, we also think that give a simple example 


 


We agree that when studying species distribution ecologists should take into account problems of detection whenever its possible. For instance, we have already published a paper* that promotes the use of MSOM in insect studies. In this way we also add a paragraph in the discussion of the manuscript submitted to your journal:


The appendix mentioned is joint with this letter, and illustrate a toy example of how use our model in MSOM.



We acknowledge the fact that if model studying optimum shifts without considering detection issues could lead to mitigating effect between ecological and observational process. However it is not the fact of our formulation, that for instance could easily be incorporated in a MSOM as shown in the new appendix mentioned above. It is more imputable to the type and quality available for research. Detection models require specific type of data, with replicated observation at sampling sites. Due to this, ecologists are often forced to omit detection bias. It is especially true in shift study under climate change contexte where past distribution had been sampled before MSOM area. Which is the case in our case of study, and common in other studies  [@]. Hence, we are sure that our formulation could be useful to many, ecologists studying shifts under dection theory and those who can't.




Our paper introduces a new model formulation to detect optimum shifts in unimodal species response curves. It describes explicitely optimum shift that could occur between two unimodal curves, it replaces the quadratic form oftenly used in GLM and GLMM to which we compare it. As EHMOS is a way of describing species response curve it could be integrated to any kind of hierarchical linear models. We present it in a hierarchical linear model that does not distinguish the observational process from the ecological process, that is there is just one level describing the presence/absence data. We were forced to do so in regards of our application data that used past data that did not allow to estimate detection probability. We think that is still the case for many ecologists using past data to investigate climate change effects, but also ecologists with limited sampling budget. 



We are sure that many readers of your journal that do not or can not (due to data limitation) use MSOM will appreciate that we introduce EHMOS in a non-detection model. For those whom use MSOM, we are also confident that they will see that is straighforward to integrate EHMOS in the occupancy part of a MSOM.  
